so a black hole is just a region of
space where you have so much stuff it's
just small amount of space then it's so
dense that the escape velocity is
greater than the speed of light and it
shouldn't matter what kind of matter you
have in that small amount of space it
could be normal matter it could be dark
matter right well it turns out that it
might be a little bit more complicated
than that so the very first and only
Eureka moment I've ever had was when I
was writing up my PhD thesis and I had
this result that showed that the
supermassive black holes at the Centers
of galaxies might be proportional to the
amount of dark matter that was also in a
galaxy what we call a Dark Matter halo
that surrounds the actual galaxy itself
and I basically had this like moment
where I was like can black holes grow by
accreting dark matter and I didn't know
the answer and I basically has just
wander the physics department asking
anybody that I could find that I thought
might be an expert on this so I have
some piece of the puzzle so I could work
out you know what to say in my thesis
about this possible result so we don't
know a lot about what dark matter is but
there is one thing we know about it and
that is that it's something we call
collisionless matter so you can have a
collisional matter and you can have
collision less matter so collision all
matter is like what you would expect
normal particles and stuff to do if they
were in like a cloud or like a box right
so you can imagine lots particles
pinging around and they're basically
just gonna hit into each other and when
they hit into each other they exchange
energy and momentum and they basically
communicate a little bit about you know
what the environment is like that
they're in so if you think about water
in a pound of stove you're playing is
heat to the bottom of the pan and the
water molecules close the bottle of
hands start to get more energy and they
start vibrating more and more and they
let in small particles and the nail
exchange energy and momentum and those
will heat up and gain an energy and so
particle in the pan basically know about
the local conditions they know what the
temperature and pressure and density is
in other areas of the pan depending on
whether they have more or less
collisions so compare that with
collision less particles you know
literally particles that just do not
collide it's not that they can't collide
it's just the probability of a collision
is extremely extremely low so we say
that their mean free path so that's sort
of the length that they can go without
experiencing another collision is much
greater than the size of the fluid
container that they're in for example
and so the particle barely interact and
so they have no idea about the local
conditions of the fluid that they're in
so they're very dependent on initial
conditions and your starting point for
how they behave so that might sound
quite a weird concept but an example of
a collisionless fluid of particles is
actually stars in a galaxy so if you
imagine the stars are the particles in
that sense then really there on orbits
around the center of the galaxy there's
no collisions between stars so the Sun
for example has no idea what speed the
other stars around it in the galaxy are
going around the center of the Milky Way
all it knows is that it's trapped in an
orbit around some central black hole
which is not a local condition at all
it's a very very far away object and
it's also based on the initial
conditions of whatever cloud of gas
formed our Milky Way because that kind
of gas must have had some angular
momentum then and then as it condensed
down and it stayed
everything's spinning that's the still
the condition that the Sun knows about
but it doesn't know about anything else
in the system so you might be wondering
how in the universe we even know that
dark matter is collisionless because you
know very little about it and also we
don't know what it's made out of but
it's actually something we've observed
in the dark matter properties when we
look out into the universe so it's a
very famous collision of two clusters of
galaxies going on that we call the
bullet cluster so galaxies don't tend to
be found by themselves they're found in
big clusters where they grouped together
under gravity and all of the space
between the galaxies tends to be taken
up by this big
hello and hot hydrogen gas so when two
clusters collide it's unlikely that the
actual galaxies themselves in the
cluster are going to collide because you
know they'd have to be on extremely
extremely tight paths you know like
threading a needle kind of thing when
reality sort of they tend to pass each
other by so we look at the collision
between these two clusters of galaxies
we use x-ray emission to trace where the
hot gases and then we use what we call
gravitational lensing to determine where
all the mass weight of all the matter is
in the image as well so this is when we
know that wherever masses in the
universe it's going to curve space-time
by Einstein's theory of general
relativity I mean any light behind that
big cluster of galaxies is going to get
curved along its path away on its way to
earth and soil acts as like a
gravitational lens and so any little
lensing events we see of galaxies in the
background behind that cluster can tell
us where all the masses in the cluster
and so when we do that we see that all
the x-ray emission is coming from the
gas that's collided and basically be
left behind is the two ghosts or
galaxies passed through each other on
this collision all the stars are
obviously had passed through each other
and then all of the mass is found
tracing the Stars and the galaxies in
that collision and so we know the dark
matter must therefore also be
collisionless just like the stars in the
galaxies but what is dark massive being
collisionless mean for supermassive
black holes trying to grow by accreting
dark matter so if you imagine a black
hole just sitting there happily and you
imagine some normal masses some gas like
falling onto the black hole what's gonna
happen is that as it falls onto the
black hole it's not gonna be on the
perfect trajectories you just take it
straight into the center gravity's gonna
get involved a little bit it's gonna
travel in a curved path and settle down
into what we call an accretion disk so a
disk of material that eventually the
black hole will accrete and so in that
accretion disk the outer regions will
actually be traveling slower than the
stuff closer in
just because of the bat that it's got a
longer path to go and it's not as
affected by the gravity of a black hole
as much but this up closer into the
black hole as long as it's not past the
event mirai than that point of no return
where it can't escape anymore it's just
going to be a really fast circular orbit
it has enough energy to just stay there
what needs to happen is it for it to
lose energy somehow and to reduce its
orbit enough so that it passes that
point of no-return how it does that is
by transferring energy to other
particles in that accretion disk by
collisions so instead of gaps if you can
imagine a clump of dark matter coming in
that same process is not going to happen
it's not collision or
it's collision less and so the process
by which you need to remove that energy
or the angular momentum it has from
going around in a very fast circular
orbit it can't have those collisions to
transfer the energy outwards and so it
will never reduce its orbit in order to
be accreted by the black hole so that
way that accretion happens around a
black hole is obviously all purely
theoretical but what we've managed to do
is confirm that idea with our
observations as well this has been done
quite recently by hopkins richards and
her inquest in 2007 where they looked at
something called the quasar luminosity
function so quasars are basically
growing supermassive black holes
so the hydrogen gas the normal matter
that's in that accretion disk around
them gets very hot due to friction and
then it starts to glow optical x-ray UV
that'll cross all the spectrum and then
we can see that and we can see the
accretion disk around the black hole so
we know that it's currently active and
growing and so a quasar luminosity
function is basically looking at the
numbers of extremely bright quasars and
the numbers of more faint equators are
all different times or redshift in the
universe and so we know how bright they
are we know how much mass there actually
going to accrete and then we can compare
that with how massive we know
supermassive black holes have grown to
be and so we can say does that amount of
brightness account for how big we now
know
chuckles ah and so what happened in his
collaborators found that actually yeah
most of them are supermassive black
holes can be explained by the brightness
that we see and so most of the mass
being increasing by supermassive black
holes must come from normal matter that
we can see because it heats up and glows
as it's being recruited the thing is all
those observations are obviously gonna
have some uncertainties about them
especially because the more distant
things you look at you know that fainter
so observations are a little bit harder
to do that less precise and so what we
need to do to confirm that result is
also to run simulations of this very
thing happening on computers and the
cool thing about simulations is it can
try and put some percentage or a number
on how much normal nothing and how much
dark matter is greeted by a black hole
over its lifetime so one group to do
this was pay Ronnie and Deb Rita's
Pacheco in 2008 and they basically said
in the ideal circumstances when
everything is so rosy you can get up to
ten percent of all the matter accreted
by a black ball in its lifetime is dark
matter only up to ten percent in reality
it's probably going to be less than that
because that idealized the whole
situation because this is just how black
holes grow you also have to consider
what happens when they all as dwell so
normal black holes that just form from
after when a massive star runs out of
fuel and then this will core collapses
down into a black hole you know that is
going to be mostly normal massive human
mostly normal matter in the star itself
as well but what about the first black
holes the first black holes that we
think vary the universe so some of you
might remember my video on direct
collapse black holes in the early
universe so instead of making sort of a
black hole it was maybe ten times the
mass of the Sun after a big supernova in
a star they run out of fuel you could
make something that was ten thousand
times the mass of the Sun to see the
formation of supermassive black holes
that could grow to a billion times the
mass the Sun at the center of galaxies
and so people have been wondering when
that process happens do you get Dark
Matter collapsing into the center of the
black hole but you also have to consider
the properties of dark matter no matter
again in that scenario so normal Maps so
when it
hunts together under gravity also has
electromagnetic forces acting on it so
magnetism and electric forces they're
going to be positive and negative they
basically make it a little bit sticky
making it more likely to clump together
more and more in collapse down at it
into a star into a black hole
dark matter though doesn't have that so
it can clump but then those constant
disperse and so it's a lot more diffuse
that's like a diffuse halos around
galaxies as well but obviously if you
have that baryonic matter collapsing
down then perhaps also you're going to
trap some dark matter in the center of
it as well but considering how dense
that normal matter has to get full of
collapse to occur it's more likely that
there's going to be a much higher
percentage of normal matter than there
is dark matter in that very first
collapse of material down into a black
hole so I'm gonna let you in on a little
astrophysics secret here and that is it
doesn't astrophysics paper in published
in a science journal and that paper has
a question for its title the answer is
usually always no and I think that
sphere of YouTube videos as well
especially ones on my channel but here I
think the case is more of a maybe we
don't know until we understand what dark
matter is and what it's actually made of
then we can't model this or simulate
this properly or understand the
observations fully that we're seeing
either so we really need particle
physicists as hurry up and figure out
what dark matter is already because we
all really want to know but lend out
both of my mics are out of battery and I
don't know how this happened at the same
time but basically Conor hates me that
it's so dense that it's escape velocity
is though is great in there
today is that by running simulations on
computers of this very thing happening
oh my god what is it with most of us in
the streets and so we think da Matta is
collision the little original collision
let's go jellal collision with original
English
you